Welcome to Movies Explained, today we're looking at, The Ritual
The movie starts with Five friends Robert, Hutch,
Phil, Dom, and Luke planning a group vacation.
They all come up with different ideas of going
to Amsterdam, Berlin, Belgium, etc., when Robert
suggests hiking in Sweden. No one is pleased
with his opinion, and so the idea gets rejected.
While going back, Luke asks his friends if they
want to come with him to get a bottle of wine.
Robert agrees to accompany him. They enter
the shop and look for bottles of alcohol
when Robert sees a woman lying on the floor,
injured, they realize there’s a robbery in
progress. Luke escapes the sight of the robbers
and hides behind a shelf. The robbers come to
Robert and ask him to give up his wallet,
rings, and any other valuables items he has.
He refuses to hand them his wedding ring, so an
argument starts between Robert and the robbers.
Luke is still hiding, trying to decide whether
to intervene or not when one of the bad guys
kills Robert. The scene shifts to 6 months later
when Luke comes out of a tent surrounded by his
friends. They start hiking between the beautiful
hills. They reach the top spot, and as a token to
remember Robert, they put his picture on a rock
and drink in his name. Everyone dips in nostalgia
and says he was a good man, the better of us. Luke
says that it should never have happened, but it
did. The night falls, and everyone starts talking
about how much Robert must have loved this place.
No one was particularly pleased with the journey,
but they did it anyway for Rob. Hutch suggests
doing a little bit more hiking to make the most of
their trip, but Luke refuses and says it's enough
for me. They are heading back to the lodge when
Dom falls and gets his ankle twisted. They decide
to take a shorter passage through the forest.
Hutch gets excited about the off-trail hiking.
After the walk some distance, Luke suggests
leaving Phil and Dom behind to get some help.
Dom immediately rejects the idea and says he can
walk if they take the quicker route. They continue
to walk through the forest, taking pictures,
talking, being unaware of what strange thing they
have gotten themselves in. While they are moving
between the trees, Phil says that this forest is
awkwardly quiet, but Dom shuts his thoughts by
saying that the trees absorb sound, making the
place calm and nothing unusual. After walking some
distance, they decide to get some rest. They start
again and are discussing their university life
when they see blood dripping down from a tree.
A body ripped open and gutted is hanging from a
tree. They also saw some strange symbols on the
tree. The group members become suspicious
and start making guesses about why someone
would hang a body from the tree like this. The
blood was still fresh, so they kept moving.
It starts raining, and they have to look for
shelter. The pals see a house from some distance
and decide to check it out. Dom suggests leaving
and going from that place, but others break into
the house as they cannot stay out in the rain.
While they all are trying to settle, Luke hears
some distorted voices coming from outside. He asks
his friends if they heard any voice coming from
outside, but they all tell him they didn't. They
find some necklaces with the same symbols they
saw outside, in the abandoned house. They want to
start a fire in that place, so they ask Phil to go
up and look for some wood. There is total darkness
up the staircase. Phil uses his torch to open the
door and yells at everyone to leave after seeing
what is inside. Everyone comes to see why Phil got
upset. A statue made of twigs of a decapitated
human torso with antlers for hands was hanging
in the room. Phil says it was something related to
witchcraft. Others are not bothered by that thing,
so they go down to get the fire started.
They discuss that Pagans and Nordic people
may have lived in this place because who else
can think to live in the middle of nowhere.
Hutch tries to make his friends comfortable by
saying that we will be okay as we have food and
supplies for now. They all talk for some time
and then go to sleep. Soft knocking and growling
sound keeps coming up from the darkness outside.
Luke wakes up from his sleep. A light appears to
come from outside the window. He follows the
light, taking him to the memory where Robert
died in the shop. He comes back to reality from
his nightmare and finds himself standing outside
the house with drops of blood on his shirt. He
finds punctured wounds on his chest. Hutch also
wakes up screaming. Luke goes inside and sees
everyone panicked and scared by the nightmares
they just had. Phil is missing. They go upstairs
to check for him, where they find him naked,
praying to the statue. Everyone gets ready to go,
and no one talks about what has just happened.
Luke is standing by a tree, looking at the
symbols. Others say that this is a warning
for them. Dom spots a path and asks his friends
to follow him down it. While they are moving,
Phil asks to discuss what just happened to them.
Hutch says it was just a bad dream, a nightmare,
and they just spooked because of it. Nothing else
happened. Phil continued insisting that something
was there. Something made him go naked and pray
to that statue. Luke becomes angry at Phil saying
it’s all non-sense and tells him that listen to
what he’s are saying. Dom is determined to get
out of that place. After some time, Dom gets tired
and decides to rest for a while. The others become
angry at him for slowing them down. They tell him
to bear the pain and move faster, or they will
never get out of that place. Dom does not respond
to them and doesn’t move. Luke decides to go and
see how far they have to go. He is standing in
the middle of the forest, looking at the wounds
on his chest, when he hears low growls. Luke sees
a creature in the woods and runs back to tell his
friends about it. He explains to them there is
something big in the woods. No one seems to be
moved by this, so Luke shows his wounds to them
and asks them if there is no one, then how did he
get those wounds. Dom denies everything he is
saying and argues with Luke. Dom says to him
that we are here because of you. Luke comes back
at him to which Dom says, where was this fight
when Robert was dying in front of you. Luke takes
his backpack and leaves when Dom says that robbers
cracked Rob's head in half and Luke didn't even
have a single drop of blood on him. In anger, he
punches Dom. Hutch steps in and breaks the fight.
Luke is leaving when Hutch tries to stop him. Luke
is disturbed by what Dom had said, and so he asks
Hutch that it was, is his fault that he didn't
stand up to the robbers when Rob died? Hutch does
not answer. They continue walking without saying
anything. While they are walking, they see some
fabric buried in the ground. They pull that thing
out and find a tent, a picture, and a credit card
that expired in 1984. Hutch tries to lighten the
tension and says, we will not end up like these
people. People will come looking for us as we have
registered in the lodge. Hutch takes Luke to a
corner and says that Phil is not looking good and
Dom is also suffering because of his knee. He is
strong, so he should go and look for help in the
morning. He will stay with the two friends. The
sound of branches snapping and growling continues.
Luke is in his tent when he hears roaring and
screeching. He unzips the tent and sneaks out
to take a look. He’s once again taken to his
memory of the day Robert was killed. He hears
someone calling him a coward and wakes up from the
dream upon hearing Phil scream. When he inspects
the situation, he finds out that Hutch is missing
and that Phil saw a creature, shadows taking him.
They hear Hutch’s screams coming from a distance.
Everyone is scared, but they gather the courage
to go and find Hutch. They follow the steps
in the mud, and after covering some distance,
they find him ripped open, hanging from a tree.
They take him down, and everyone is crying about
losing another friend. Luke says to go because
the creature that did this will be coming back,
but Dom insists on giving Hutch a proper burial.
Dom argues on this with Luke. He says to keep his
voice down. He tries to calm them by saying
that I have a knife, and we know the path
Hutch told us so we can safely get out of the
forest. They keep going. They stop to drink water
when they see foot prints in the mud. Dom suggests
that it means there are people out there. Luke
decides not to follow them and continues going to
Southwest. Everyone is disturbed by what happened,
but Luke tells them that they are far
from that house now and are somehow safe.
Dom stops to gasp some air. Luke moves to get a
look at where they have reached. He sees the end
and comes back to tell his friends about it. Luke
finds out that the creature has attacked Phil and
that his friends are not there. Luke again
goes into his nightmare, and when he snaps
back into reality, he starts looking for his
friends. Luke finds Dom hiding behind a tree,
scared to death. Dom says he doesn't know what
happened, but they figured out that the creature
was hunting them. Luke tells him that he has found
a way out and will not let anything happen to Dom.
The sound of the branches snapping continues in
the darkness. Luke tells Dom that he will count
down from 3, and then they will run as fast as
possible. The heavy footsteps start to follow
them, and the growling grows louder. They spot the
creature and run from it. After wandering through
the forest for a while they find Phil's body
hanging from a tree. They continue running through
the forest as the creature seemingly follows
them, they see a house, and when they enter it,
the radio is playing, and they see some
people in there. They are knocked out,
and when they wake up, they find themselves
chained in a cellar. Luke tries to see out
from an opening in the wooden wall and sees
some people. They plan to cut the rope with
the glass of the bottle lying on the table when
two men and one woman enter the room. The woman
offers Luke some water and sees the wounds
on his chest. She also shows him the ones
on her. She then goes to Dom but doesn't offer
him water. Instead, she says something in an
unknown language, and the man takes Dom outside
up the stairs. Luke hears thudding, growling,
and crying. A girl visits Luke and says that the
people will prepare for the sacrifice ritual soon.
After some time, they bring Dom back to the
cellar. He is not in good shape and is bleeding.
Luke asks him if he’s okay. Dom starts telling
him about the nightmare he saw in that house. Dom
says that he saw these people offering him to that
creature, and at the end, he saw his wife, Gayle.
He says I will die here, but you have to live.
Burn the place down when you leave it and tell my
wife that I tried to get back to her. People then
take Dom for the sacrifice as Luke looks through
the opening. The group chants meanwhile Luke
tries to get the cuffs off his hands. Dom yells
at the people, “go on, what are you waiting for
now”. The creature appears from behind the trees,
and people start bowing to him. Dom then sees
the image of her wife coming out of the forest.
He didn't realize it was the creature until it
held him and hung him on the tree. Dom dies. The
girl comes to inform Luke that your ritual will
begin, and either you have to kneel before him,
or he will kill you like everyone else. Luke
asks the girl that what this creature is. She
says that it is an ancient god, one of the Jotunn
and offspring of Loki. Luke asks her why him? The
girl replies that your pain is great. He tells her
that I am not like you and I will not live like
you. When the girl goes, Luke sets himself free.
He opens the door and sees outside the room.
He then takes the wooden stick lit with fire and
moves upstairs. When he opens the door, he finds
a twisted congregation of mummified worshippers
that begin to move. He set them on fire and comes
out of the room, attracting the Jotunn. Luke
finds a hunting rifle and loads it. The creature
kills one of the followers and drops the body.
Luke runs from there, and while he is running,
he looks back and gets a complete picture of
the creature. He tries to get a shot at it,
and after he does, the creature starts to follow
him. Jotunn messes with his mind and shows him the
scene from the shop where Robert died. Luke keeps
running until the creature hits him, and he falls
to the ground. The beast gives Luke a chance
to submit, but then he strikes it with an ax.
Luke runs from there while the creature shrieks
and shouts. He keeps running until he finds
himself in an open field with the sun coming up.
The Jotunn roars in anger while Luke shouts back
at it. Luke continues to follow the paved road,
and the story ends with his survival and triumph.